+++
title = "Optimal Transport and Mean-field games"
tags = "optimal-transport"
draft = false
+++


[Last time](/posts/ot) we had an introductory look at OT, the definition and computation of the Wasserstein distance.

A few years ago, I wrote a solver for this variational formulation of mean-field games, as part of a project. This eventually led to a [small C++ library](https://github.com/ManifoldFR/entropic-mfg) as a toy project, which might or might not be usable.

<!-- more -->

## Mean-Field Games

The dynamics are defined by
\begin{equation}
    dX_t = \alpha_t X_tdt + \sigma dW_t
\end{equation}
where \\( W \\) is a Brownian motion. Typically \\(  W  \\) could be an \\(  \RR^d  \\)-brownian motion with independent components.

\begin{equation}
    \inf_{(\alpha_t)_t} J(\alpha) = \EE\left[ \int_0^T \frac{1}{2}\|\alpha_t\|^2 + f(X_t, \rho_t) dt + g(X_T, \rho_T) \right]
\end{equation}

where \\(  \rho_t = \mathcal{L}(X_t)  \\) is the marginal distribution of the random variable \\(  X_t  \\).
The optimality condition for this stochastic control problem where established by Lasry and Lions: they are known as the *mean-field game equations*. They are a system of coupled Fokker-Planck and Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations:
\begin{align}
    \partial_t \rho &= \frac{\sigma^2}{2}\Delta \rho - \mathrm{div}(\rho\nabla u)  \\
    -\partial_t u - \frac{\sigma^2}{2}\Delta u + \frac{1}{2}|\nabla u|^2 &= f(x, \rho)  \\\\
    u(T,\cdot) &= g(x, \rho_T)
\end{align}
These are nonlinear equations due to the control cost term \\(  |\nabla u|^2  \\) in the second, HJB partial differential equation. The first PDE is a linear, Fokker-Planck PDE. The optimal control is given in feedback form as \\(  \alpha^*_t = \nabla_x u(t, X_t)  \\).
[Numerical methods](https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00392074/document) for these equations can involve a fair bit of finite-difference discretisation, Krylov subspace methods...

Here, we lay out a solution method for this particular case of MFG (some might say the control Hamiltonian has a rather specific form...) using optimal transport theory.

### A variational approach

Define \\(  F(\rho) = \int f(x, \rho)d\rho(x)  \\) and similarly \\(  G(\rho) = \int g(x, \rho)d\rho(x) \\).
The variational approach separates the probability distribution path \\(  \{\rho_t\}  \\) as a problem variable, and directly optimizes over the feedback control function \\(  v(t,x) = \nabla_x u (t,x)  \\), which we recall should be drift coefficient of the underlying SDE.
That formulation, reads
$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
    &\inf_{\rho,v} \int_0^T \frac{1}{2}|v(t,x)|_2^2 + F(\rho_t)dt + G(\rho_T) \\\\
    &\suchthat \partial_t\rho = \frac{\sigma^2}{2}\Delta\rho - \mathrm{div}(\rho v)
\end{split}
\end{equation}
$$
The optimality conditions of this equation, should yield the HJB equation from before.
There are several ways of solving this problem directly, by casting it as a nonlinear program: the transcription step will discretise the continuous space, (using a grid, triangulated mesh, PL manifold...), and discretise the integral and constraint in time. The obtained finite-dimensional program will be a traditional NLP, but with the structure of a discrete-time optimal control problem (DTOCP). Benamou and Carlier introduced an augmented Lagrangian method for this problem in [1].

[2] introduces a Lagrangian variational formulation of the mean-field game, which reads
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
    &\inf_{Q, \{\mu_t\}} \mathcal{K}(Q) + \int_0^T F(\mu_t)dt + G(\mu_T)   \\\\
    &\suchthat P_tQ = \mu_t
\end{split}
\end{equation}
where the unknown \\(  Q  \\) is a measure over the space of trajectories \\(  \mathbb{X}  \\), and \\(  P_t  \\) denotes the marginal operator at time \\(  t  \\), which is the pushforward of the evaluation map \\(  \delta_t: \omega \longmapsto \omega(t)  \\).[^fn1]
The important part is the kinetic energy term
\\[
    \mathcal{K}(Q) = \int_{\mathbb{X}} \int_{[0,T]} \frac{1}{2} |\dot{\omega}(t)|^2dtdQ(\omega).
\\]

Now, you may ask where the dynamics went. It's all very subtle here, but they're actually not that far. They're actually baked into the optimization objective over path distributions \\(  Q  \\).

The result is that the above problem is an optimal transport problem! Granted, it has an uncountably infinite number of marginals, but we can still discretize it. We consider $ N + 1 $ time steps $(t_0, \ldots, t_N)$ (for convenience, with fixed step size $\Delta t$), and corresponding marginals $ (\mu_0, \ldots, \mu_N) $.

Then, the discrete-time counterpart is a multimarginal optimal transport problem
$$
\begin{equation}
    \inf_{Q, (\mu_i) } \mathcal{K}(Q) + \sum_{i=0}^N F(\mu_i) + G(\mu_N)\\
    \suchthat
    P_{t_i}Q = \mu_i.
\end{equation}
$$

---

* [1] Jean-David Benamou, Guillaume Carlier, *Augmented Lagrangian Methods for Transport Optimization, Mean-Field Games and Degenerate PDEs*. <https://www.ceremade.dauphine.fr/~carlier/ALG2_Draft.pdf>
* [2] Jean-David Benamou, Guillaume Carlier, Filippo Santambrogio, *Variational Mean Field Games*. <https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01295299/document>
* [3] Jean-David Benamou, Guillaume Carlier, Simone Marino, Luca Nenna, *An entropy minimization approach to second-order variational mean-field games*. <https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01848370v4/document>

[^fn1]: Meaning \\(  P_t  \\) takes a measure \\(  Q  \\) over the space of paths, and maps it to the marginal distribution of \\(  \omega(t)  \\) given $ \omega \sim Q $.
